---
layout: post
title: "Relationship Between Streams and Tables"
date: 2017-09-25 22:10:28 -0400
permalink: /kafka-streams-tables/
comments: false
categories:
- Kafka
- Kafka-Streams
tags:
- Kafka
- Kafka-Streams 
keywords:
- Kafka
- Kafka-Streams
- Kafka Processor 
description: Relationship Between Tables and Streams 
---
 
In this blog post, we’re going to look deeper into adding state. Along the way, we’ll get introduced to new abstraction, the KTable, after which we will move further to discuss how event streams and database tables relate to one another in Kafka's Streaming API.

<!--more-->

NOTE: (Save 37% off [*Kafka Streams in Action*](https://www.manning.com/books/kafka-streams-in-action) with code **streamkafka**)

When covering the KStream API, we’re talking about individual events or
an event stream. When “Jane Doe” makes a purchase, we consider the
purchase as an individual event. We don’t keep track of how often or how
many purchases Jane has carried out before.

If you think about the purchase event stream concerning a database, it
can be considered a series of inserts. Because each record is new and
unrelated to any other records, we continually insert records into a
table.

Now let’s add some context by adding a key to each purchase event. Going
back to Jane Doe, we now have a series of updated purchase events.
Because we’re using a primary key (customer-id) each purchase is now an
update to any previous purchase Jane made. Treating an event stream with
keys as inserts and events with keys as updates is what we use to define
the relationship between streams and tables.

### The Relationship between Streams and Tables

A stream as an infinite sequence of events, but stating “infinite
sequence of events” is generic; let’s narrow it down with a specific
example.

#### A Record Stream

To demonstrate a record or event stream, a series of stock price quotes for example, we can use the image below:

<img src="{{ site.media_url }}/images/ks/kst_figure_1.png"/>

We can see from this picture that each stock price is a discrete event
and they aren’t related to each other. Even if the same company accounts
for many price quotes, we’re only looking at them one at a time.

This view of events is how the KStream works. The KStream is a stream of
records. We can show how this concept ties into database tables. In the
next image, we present a simple stock quote table:

<img src="{{ site.media_url }}/images/ks/kst_figure_2.jpg"/>

This simple database table represents stock prices for
companies. There’s a key column, and other columns contain the values.
It’s fair to say we have a key-value pair if we lump the other columns
into a "value" container.

Now let’s take another look at the record stream. Because each record
stands on its own, the stream represents inserts into a table. In the
following image, we’ve combined the two concepts to illustrate this
point:

<img src="{{ site.media_url }}/images/ks/kst_figure_3.jpg"/>

Here we see how a stream of individual events compared to
inserts in a database table. We can flip this around and look at how we
could stream each row of the table.

What’s important here is that we can view a stream of events in the same
light as inserts into a table, which helps give us a deeper
understanding of using streams for working with events.

The next step in our comparison of streams to tables is to consider the
case when several flows of events have something to do with each other.

### Updates to Records or the Change Log

Let’s take the same stream of customer transactions, but now we want to
track activity over time. If we alter the key to the customer id,
instead of a stream of records we have a stream of updates. In this
case, no record stands alone, and we can consider this a stream of
updates or a change log. The image below demonstrates this concept:

<img src="{{ site.media_url }}/images/ks/kst_figure_4.jpg"/>

No record pictured above stands on its own. With a record stream, we
would have a total count of four events. In the case of updates or a
change log, we only have one. Each incoming record overwrites the
previous one with the same key.

Here we can see the relationship between a stream of updates and a
database table. Both the log and change log represent incoming records
appended to the end of a file. In a log, we need to see all the records.
But with a change log, we only want to keep the latest record for any
given key.

### Log vs. Change Log

With both the log and change log, as records come in they are always
appended at the end of the file. The distinction between the two is in a
log where you want to read *all* records, but in a change log, you only
want the *latest* record for each key.

Now we need a way to trim down the log as we maintain those latest
arriving records (per key). The good news is that we have an approach
that works – log compaction. Let’s take another look at the image for
review:

<img src="{{ site.media_url }}/images/ks/kst_figure_5.jpg"/>

On the left is a log before compaction. You’ll notice
duplicate keys with different values, which are updates. On the right is
the log after compaction. Notice we keep the latest value for each key,
but the log is smaller in size.

We can see the impact of the compacted log in this image. Because we
only care about the latest values, we can remove older key-value pairs
(This section derived information from Jay Kreps in
[*https://www.confluent.io/blog/introducing-kafka-streams-streamprocessing-made-simple/*](https://www.confluent.io/blog/introducing-kafka-streams-streamprocessing-made-simple/)).

We’re already familiar with record or event streams from working with
KStreams. For a change log or stream of updates, Kafka Streams provides
the KTable. Now that we’ve established the relationship between streams
and tables, our next step is to compare an event stream to an update
stream. We’ll make this comparison by watching a KStream and KTable in
action side by side.

### Event Streams vs Update Streams

In this section, we’ll show event and update streams by comparing the
KStream to the KTable. We’ll do this by running a simple stock ticker
application. The stock ticker application writes the current share price
for three (fictitious!) companies. We’ll produce three iterations of
stock quotes for a total of nine records.

A KStream and KTable instance reads the records and writes them to the
console via the print method. The following image shows the results of
running the application:

<img src="{{ site.media_url }}/images/ks/kst_figure_6.jpg"/>

As you can see from the results, the KStream printed all nine records
out. We expect the KStream to behave this way as it views each record as
an individual event. In contrast, the KTable only printed three records.
From what we learned above, though, this is how we’d expect the KTable
to perform.

### The Need for Primary Keys

The example in the previous section demonstrated how a KTable works with
updates. There was an implicit assumption that I’ll make explicit here.
When working with a KTable, your records must have populated keys in the
key-value pairs. Having a key is essential for the KTable to work. As you
can’t update a record in a database table without having the key, the
same rule applies here as well.

From the KTable point of view, it didn’t receive nine individual
records. The KTable received three original records and updates to those
records twice. The KTable only printed the last round of updates. Notice
the KTable records are the same as the last three records published by
the KStream.

Here’s our program printing stock ticker results to the console:

```java  KTable and KStreams Printing to the Console

KTable<String, StockTickerData> stockTickerTable = kStreamBuilder.table(STOCK_TICKER_TABLE_TOPIC, "ticker-store"); 

KStream<String, StockTickerData> stockTickerStream =kStreamBuilder.stream(STOCK_TICKER_STREAM_TOPIC); 

stockTickerTable.toStream().print( "Stocks-KTable");
stockTickerStream.print( "Stocks-KStream");

```

Here are the main points of the simple program above 

 1. Creating the KTable instance (line 1)
 2. Creating the KStream instance (line 3)
 3. KTable printing results to the console (line 5)
 4. KStream printing results to the console (line 6)

### Serdes Configuration

I should point out that in creating the KTable and KStream we didn’t
specify any Serdes to use. The same is true with both calls to the print
method. We were able to do this because we registered our default Serdes
in the configuration like this:

``` java Serde Configuration
props.put(StreamsConfig.KEY_SERDE_CLASS_CONFIG,Serdes.String().getClass().getName());

props.put(StreamsConfig.VALUE_SERDE_CLASS_CONFIG,StreamsSerdes.StockTickerSerde().getClass().getName());
```

If we used different types then we’d need to provide Serdes in any
method reading or writing records.

The takeaway here is that records in a stream with the same key are
updates to events, not new events by themselves. A stream of updates is
the main concept behind working with the KTable.

That’s all for this article. For more, download the free first chapter
of [*Kafka Streams in
Action*](https://www.manning.com/books/kafka-streams-in-action).
